README.md, before:

# Awesome Academic Writing [![Awesome](https://awesome.re/badge.svg)](https://awesome.re)

[<img src="android-chrome-512x512.png" align="right" width="100">](https://maehr.github.io/awesome-academic-writing/)

> A curated list of awesome things related to academic writing.

Writing is an important part of science. Even if many scientists are in the lab all day, they have to write down their results at the end. This collection contains the best tools for academic writing for people who love distraction free writing with (Pandoc) Markdown (and do not want to drown in LaTeX source code).

Most of the software, templates, and guides depend on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) and [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/). ([Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is the swiss army knife for document conversion. [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) is the one and only typesetting system.)

## Contents

- [How to](#how-to)
- [Word Processors](#word-processors)
- [Bibliography](#bibliography)
- [Tips and Tricks](#tips-and-tricks)
- [Templates and Guides](#templates-and-guides)
  - [Markdown](#markdown)
  - [R Markdown](#r-markdown)

## How to

- [A Plain Text Workflow for Academic Writing with Atom](http://u.arizona.edu/~selisker/post/workflow/)
- [Sustainable Authorship in Plain Text using Pandoc and Markdown](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdown)
- [How to use Pandoc to produce a research paper](https://opensource.com/article/18/9/pandoc-research-paper)

## Word Processors

- [Marktext](https://marktext.app/)
- [Zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/)
- [Joplin](https://joplinapp.org/)
- [Notable](https://github.com/notable/notable)
- [RStudio](https://github.com/rstudio/rstudio)
- [Atom](https://atom.io)
  - [Markdown Preview Enhanced for Atom](https://github.com/shd101wyy/markdown-preview-enhanced)
  - [Autocomplete BibTex for Atom](https://github.com/apcshields/autocomplete-bibtex)

## Bibliography

- [JabRef](https://www.jabref.org/) - Open source bibliography reference manager.
- [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) - Free, easy-to-use tool to help you collect, organize, cite, and share research.
- [BetterBibTex for Zotero](https://retorque.re/zotero-better-bibtex/) - The missing BibLaTex integration for Zotero.
  - [ZotFile for Zotero](http://zotfile.com/) - The missing PDF file management for Zotero.
  - [Zotero Styles](https://www.zotero.org/styles) - More than 9'000 CSL styles for Zotero, Mendeley and the like.
- [CSL Language and Editor](https://github.com/citation-style-language/csl-editor) - If you don not like my style, create your own.

## Tips and Tricks

- [Ten simple rules for scientists: Improving your writing productivity](https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006379)
- [Writing for an academic journal: 10 tips](https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/sep/06/academic-journal-writing-top-tips)
- [How to write a scientific abstract in six easy steps](https://www.easterbrook.ca/steve/2010/01/how-to-write-a-scientific-abstract-in-six-easy-steps/)

## Templates and Guides

Most of these templates depend on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) and [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/). Make sure to install those dependencies.

### Markdown

- [Markdown tutorial](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/)
- [Eisvogel](https://github.com/Wandmalfarbe/pandoc-latex-template) - A clean academic pandoc LaTeX template.
- [Academic Pandoc Template](https://github.com/maehr/academic-pandoc-template) - Simple academic paper template.
- [Pandoc Starter](https://github.com/jez/pandoc-starter) - Article, Beamer presentation, book, homework and handout.
- [Pandoc Scholar](https://github.com/pandoc-scholar/pandoc-scholar) - Full blown academic template with enhanced metadata.
- [User contributed templates](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/wiki/User-contributed-templates)

### R Markdown

- [R Markdown Book](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/) - All you need to know to use R Markdown.
- [Bookdown](https://github.com/rstudio/bookdown) - Templates books in PDF, LaTeX, HTML, EPUB and Word.
- [Steve's R Markdown Templates](https://github.com/svmiller/svm-r-markdown-templates/) - Academic manuscript, memos, Beamer presentation, syllabus and CV.
- [University of Zurich Master Thesis Template](https://github.com/maehr/uzh-ma-thesis)

## Contribute

Contributions welcome! Read the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/maehr/awesome-academic-writing/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) first.

## License

[![CC0](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/svg/cc-zero.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0)

To the extent possible under law, Moritz Mähr has waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to this work.

Commit message:

Update Feb 2020 (#2)
* description improved

* added spellchecking, fixed indentation

* format LICENSE according to GH standard

* illustrations and guides added

README.md, after:

# Awesome Academic Writing [![Awesome](https://awesome.re/badge.svg)](https://awesome.re)

[<img src="android-chrome-512x512.png" align="right" width="100">](https://maehr.github.io/awesome-academic-writing/)

> A curated list of awesome things related to academic writing.

Writing is an important part of science. Even if many scientists are in the lab all day, they have to write down their results at the end. This collection contains the best tools for academic writing for people who love distraction free writing with (Pandoc) Markdown (and do not want to drown in LaTeX source code).

Most of the software, templates, and guides depend on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) and [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/). ([Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is the swiss army knife for document conversion. [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) is the one and only typesetting system.)

## Contents

- [How To](#how-to)
- [Word Processors](#word-processors)
- [Bibliography](#bibliography)
- [Spellchecking](#spellchecking)
- [Tips and Tricks](#tips-and-tricks)
- [Templates and Guides](#templates-and-guides)
  - [Markdown](#markdown)
  - [R Markdown](#r-markdown)
- [Illustrations](#illustrations)

## How To

- [A Plain Text Workflow for Academic Writing with Atom](http://u.arizona.edu/~selisker/post/workflow/)
- [Sustainable Authorship in Plain Text using Pandoc and Markdown](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdown)
- [How to use Pandoc to produce a research paper](https://opensource.com/article/18/9/pandoc-research-paper)

## Word Processors

- [Marktext](https://marktext.app/)
- [Zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/)
- [Joplin](https://joplinapp.org/)
- [Notable](https://github.com/notable/notable)
- [RStudio](https://github.com/rstudio/rstudio)
- [Atom](https://atom.io)
  - [Markdown Preview Enhanced for Atom](https://github.com/shd101wyy/markdown-preview-enhanced)
  - [Autocomplete BibTex for Atom](https://github.com/apcshields/autocomplete-bibtex)

## Bibliography

- [JabRef](https://www.jabref.org/) - Open source bibliography reference manager.
- [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) - Free, easy-to-use tool to help you collect, organize, cite, and share research.
  - [BetterBibTex for Zotero](https://retorque.re/zotero-better-bibtex/) - The missing BibLaTex integration for Zotero.
  - [ZotFile for Zotero](http://zotfile.com/) - The missing PDF file management for Zotero.
- [Zotero Styles](https://www.zotero.org/styles) - More than 9'000 CSL styles for Zotero, Mendeley and the like.
- [CSL Language and Editor](https://github.com/citation-style-language/csl-editor) - If you don not like my style, create your own.

## Spellchecking

- [LanguageTool](https://languagetool.org/) - Checks your grammar, style and spelling in more than 20 languages.
- [GNU Aspell](http://aspell.net/)
- [Hunspell](http://hunspell.github.io/)

## Tips and Tricks

- [Ten simple rules for scientists: Improving your writing productivity](https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006379)
- [Writing for an academic journal: 10 tips](https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/sep/06/academic-journal-writing-top-tips)
- [How to write a scientific abstract in six easy steps](https://www.easterbrook.ca/steve/2010/01/how-to-write-a-scientific-abstract-in-six-easy-steps/)
- [Harvard Writing Resources](https://writingcenter.fas.harvard.edu/pages/resources)

## Templates and Guides

Most of these templates depend on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) and [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/). Make sure to install those dependencies.

### Markdown

- [Markdown tutorial](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/)
- [Eisvogel](https://github.com/Wandmalfarbe/pandoc-latex-template) - A clean academic pandoc LaTeX template.
- [Academic Pandoc Template](https://github.com/maehr/academic-pandoc-template) - Simple academic paper template.
- [Pandoc Starter](https://github.com/jez/pandoc-starter) - Article, Beamer presentation, book, homework and handout.
- [Pandoc Scholar](https://github.com/pandoc-scholar/pandoc-scholar) - Full blown academic template with enhanced metadata.
- [User contributed templates](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/wiki/User-contributed-templates)

### R Markdown

- [R Markdown Book](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/) - All you need to know to use R Markdown.
- [Bookdown](https://github.com/rstudio/bookdown) - Templates books in PDF, LaTeX, HTML, EPUB and Word.
- [Steve's R Markdown Templates](https://github.com/svmiller/svm-r-markdown-templates/) - Academic manuscript, memos, Beamer presentation, syllabus and CV.
- [University of Zurich Master Thesis Template](https://github.com/maehr/uzh-ma-thesis)

## Illustrations

Drawing illustrations themselves has driven many a scientist mad. Fortunately, there are formal languages with which one can create beautiful graphics.

- [Mermaid Live Editor](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid-live-editor/) - Define simple diagrams instead of drawing them.
- [Vega Lite](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/examples/) - Define charts and more complex diagrams.
- [PlantUML](https://plantuml.com/) - Define UML diagrams instead of drawing them.

## Contribute

Contributions welcome! Read the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/maehr/awesome-academic-writing/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) first.

## License

[![CC0](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/svg/cc-zero.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0)

To the extent possible under law, Moritz Mähr has waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to this work.
